Fixed-size tasks: remove `next-batch` functionality. (#308)
ietf-wg-ppm/draft-ietf-ppm-dap: draft-ietf-ppm-dap.md

given query type. A query is defined as follows:

~~~

> uint64 BatchID;

Author: 👍🏻 I restored it to 32 bytes as originally written; I suppose this matches the size of other "opaque identifiers for which we want to enable random generation with negligible collision chance". (I'd advocate for changing all of these identifiers to 16 bytes rather than 32, but I also think that's a separable change, and so for now I think maintaining consistency is more valuable.)

> uint64 BatchID;

Reviewer: I'd be all for 16 bytes, but yes this change is separable :) One thing we need to keep in mind is whether we need IDs to be the hash of things, in which case 32 bytes might be better.

~~~
enum {
    by-batch-id(0),
    current-batch(1),
} FixedSizeQueryType;

> uint64 BatchId;

Reviewer: Since other "IDs" have type `opaque [32]`, I wonder if it makes sense to give this a different name. What about `BatchNum`?

Author: I like calling it an "ID" because that is an accurate description of this type's semantics -- it's a primary identifier for a batch. The difference in types doesn't bother me so much; IMO, it's fairly natural for IDs for different kinds of entities to have different types, depending on the needs for the ID.

OTOH, we might rename some messages such that a "batch ID" is either an interval (for `time-interval` tasks) or an opaque numeric value (for `fixed-size` tasks), i.e.:

```
struct BatchID {
  select (query_type) {
    case time-interval: Interval batch_interval;
    case fixed-size: BatchID batch_id;
  }
}
```

This would be "cleaner" (IMO) -- this new BatchID struct would effectively replace the Query -- but I'm not sure it's worth taking the time to do right now.

Reviewer: Good point about my suggestion. The second idea I like quite a lot as well, though I think we'd have to rename the inner "batch_id" :) If the change is not overly invasive, I say go for it and let's see what it looks like! Just be ready to revert if needed.

Reviewer: Actually, thinking about it more, it sounds like what you want is to rename "Query" to "BatchID"?

Author: Thinking about this some more, I think I don't want to rename Query to BatchID: while this would work well for `fixed-size`, I think the interval included in `time-interval` isn't quite an ID: specifically, `time-interval` tasks allow queries that span multiple `min_batch_duration` intervals, so for `time-interval` the query is actually describing a range of batches rather than a single batch. IMO, a batch ID would identify a single `min_batch_duration` interval for `time-interval`.

(of course, I could keep Query and separately define BatchID, but at that point the suggested change is no longer a simplification...)

by Clients (or added to aggregate shares by Aggregators) in order to achieve
differential privacy.

For this query type, the Aggregators group reports into arbitrary batches such
that each batch has roughly the same number of reports. These batches are
identified by "batch IDs", which are numerical identifiers allocated

> consecutively starting from 0.

Reviewer 2: Should we say "monotonic" to allow discontinuities in batch IDs? Does anything bad happen if there are discontinuities in batch IDs? I assume we already have text instructing aggregators what to do if they don't recognize a batch ID.

Author: I think we don't want discontinuities: the idea of this approach is that the Collector can send requests for batch 0, followed by batch 1, followed by batch 2, and so on -- i.e. that the Collector can predict the sequence of batch identifiers. While a failed aggregation or technical issues might lead to an uncollectable batch, which (hopefully) is communicated well enough for the Collector to realize it won't be able to collect that batch, allowing the Leader to skip arbitrary batch IDs would currently be painful[1]. For example, if the Leader decided to skip `10^6` batch IDs, I suppose the Collector would have to walk through `10^6` collect requests getting an "unknown batch" before finding the next "good" batch.

[1] I think the best way to reduce this pain, if we decide we need to, would be to have some way for the Collector to ask the Leader which batch IDs are usable/acceptable. That's what I was trying to get at with the now-removed `current-batch` functionality, to allow Collectors to startup against Aggregators that have been running for awhile without the need for out-of-band communication. Like with that functionality, IMO we should see whether we need to implement something more complicated before we specify it.

Author: > LGTM. One potential downside is that the Leader can no longer choose batch IDs at random, since it needs to fill batch IDs consecutively. I wonder if this could potentially create a processing bottleneck for the Leader. (I don't know the answer so I'm hoping other reviewers will take the time to think this through!)

I'm not _too_ worried about this over-and-above the current design: I think there is already effectively a "serialization point" required when the Leader assigns the next aggregation job to a batch -- at that point, it needs to know how many outstanding aggregation jobs are assigned to batches, and how many reports are in those aggregation jobs, in order to decide the batch ID to use for its next aggregation job. I think it needs to know this since, if this knowledge is unavailable or imprecise, it might assign too many reports to a single batch, leading to those reports being uncollectable.

Once you have a serialization point at point-of-generation-of-aggregation-job, choosing a new batch ID would be something like the pseudo-SQL `SELECT MAX(batch_id) + 1 FROM batches WHERE batch_full = false`.

That said -- maybe the existing serialization point will be too much of a performance hit, with or without generating a consecutive batch ID? I guess implementation experience will tell. I'm not too worried since this serialization point wouldn't affect the aggregation protocol, which is likely to be the costliest part of the overall protocol, but it's hard to be certain without actually implementing.

(also, did I miss something with the above? maybe there's some kinds of imprecision in knowledge of assignment of client reports/aggregation jobs to batches that would allow a serialization point to be safely skipped?)

Reviewer 2: OK, then do we need a MUST describing how the leader should assign batch IDs?

Author: Sure -- the existing text in the "Fixed-size Queries" section defined them this way, but it's probably valuable to reiterate this point in the "Leader Initialization" section since that section defines the specific protocol steps. I did so in terms of a `MUST`.

To get the aggregate of a batch, the Collector issues a query specifying the
batch ID of interest (see {{query}}). The Collector will typically request each
batch in turn in consecutive order; it is expected that the batch ID to start
from will be configured out-of-band from the DAP protocol.

> In addition to the minumum batch size common to all query types, the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In addition to the minimum batch size common to all query types, the
```

by Clients (or added to aggregate shares by Aggregators) in order to achieve
differential privacy.

For this query type, the Aggregators group reports into arbitrary batches such
that each batch has roughly the same number of reports. These batches are
identified by "batch IDs", which are numerical identifiers allocated
consecutively starting from 0.

To get the aggregate of a batch, the Collector issues a query of type
`by-batch-id`, specifying the batch ID of interest in the query. (See
`FixedSizeQuery` in {{query}}.) The Collector may not know which batch ID it is

> interested in (for example, in startup scenarios); in this case, it can also

Author: The `current-batch` functionality may not be ideal:

* It assumes that a Collector might want to start up against a task that has already collected some batches, and will want to start from "recent" data. If this is not the case (for example, if we assume that a Collector can always safely start from batch ID 0, or are OK saying that communicating a "recent" batch ID can be done out-of-band), we could drop this functionality entirely.
* Even if we keep this functionality, it would be nicer to separate "give me a recent batch ID" from "start collecting a batch ID". One way to do this would be to expose an endpoint that forwards to a recent batch ID; this would be easier to specify with #278, at which point the batch ID might be specified as part of the URL.

Reviewer: Yeah, this is a bit hairy. The protocol seems like it would be a lot simpler if all the Collector could do is specify which batch ID it wants.

Do you thin this functionality is needed right now? If not, maybe better to punt on and keep DAP-02 simple.

Author: I think an eventual "final"/"production-quality" design would definitely want some provision to allow Collectors to discover a recent batch ID from the Aggregators.

However, you're probably right that this isn't needed for initial testing: I suspect interop-test-level deployments can get away with the Collector always starting at batch ID 0, and if that doesn't work out, out-of-band communications would allow configuration of the Collector to start from the correct batch ID.

I went ahead and tore out the `current-batch` functionality for now.

Reviewer: Sounds good. Most likely we'll be able to spell this feature when we actually need it.

* Information used by the Aggregators to determine how to aggregate each report:

    * For fixed-size tasks, the Leader specifies a "batch ID" that determines

>       the batch to which each report for this aggregation job belongs. The

Author: I'm not totally sure "The Leader MAY allocate batch IDs in any order." is necessary -- we could remove this sentence and leave this implicit. Thoughts?

Reviewer: I agree it's unnecessary.

Author: Removed.

* Information used by the Aggregators to determine how to aggregate each report:

    * For fixed-size tasks, the Leader specifies a "batch ID" that determines
      the batch to which each report for this aggregation job belongs. The

>       Leader MUST allocate these IDs consecutively starting from 0.

Reviewer 3: this contradicts with previous text: "it is expected that the batch ID to start
 from will be configured out-of-band from the DAP protocol." at line #571

Author: Ah, good point. The intent of the text you reference on line 571 is that a Collector that starts after the Aggregators have been running may not be able to start from 0 -- while the Aggregators generated batch IDs starting form 0, by the time the Collector starts, batch ID 0 will have already been garbage collected & no longer be available for collection. Given that, the Collector needs some way to know where to start from.

That said, this text is confusing & likely unnecessary at this point. I deleted the relevant text around line 571.

##### Boundary Check

For fixed-size tasks, the batch boundaries are defined by numeric batch IDs.
Thus the Aggregator needs to check that the query is associated with a known
batch ID:

* For a CollectReq, the Leader checks that the provided batch ID corresponds to

>   a batch ID it returned in a previous CollectResp for the task.

Reviewer: Is this required? For this PR we're assuming the mechanism by which batch IDs are assigned is implementation-specific. (This will be addressed in the follow-up PR.)

Author: Good point, I think it's not required in this PR. Removed.

##### Boundary Check

For fixed-size tasks, the batch boundaries are defined by consecutive numeric
"batch IDs". Thus the Aggregator needs to check that the query is associated
with a known batch ID:

* If the query contained in the CollectReq has type `by-batch-id`, the Leader

>   MAY fail if the batch ID is considered out of range (too small or too large).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  MAY abort with error "XXX" if the batch ID is considered out of range (too small or too large).
```

Author: In the Batch Validation section, these boundary conditions are specified as causing a failure of type "batchInvalid". I reworded this from "failing" to "checking", since this section should be describing a set of checks.

Reviewer: Yup, you're right. I was a bit careless there. Text looks good after revision.

* The Helper checks that the batch ID provided by the Leader in its
  AggregateShareReq corresponds to a batch ID used in a previous

>   AggregateInitializeReq for the task. The Helper MAY fail if the batch ID is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  AggregateInitializeReq for the task. The Helper MAY abort with error "XXX" if the batch ID is
```

Author: Same as above: in the Batch Validation section, these boundary conditions are specified as causing a failure of type "batchInvalid". I reworded this from "failing" to "checking", since this section should be describing a set of checks.
